docs: schema id docs (#8484)
confluentinc/ksql: docs/operate-and-deploy/schema-inference-with-id.md

---
layout: page
title: Schema Inference With ID
tagline: ksqlDB Schema Inference With ID
description: ksqlDB integrates with Confluent Schema Registry to read and write schemas as needed 
keywords: serialization, schema, schema registry, json, avro, delimited, KEY_SCHEMA_ID, VALUE_SCHEMA_ID
---
## Schema Inference With ID

For supported [serialization formats](/reference/serialization), ksqlDB can use 
[Schema Inference](/operate-and-deploy/schema-registry-integration#schema-inference) to retrieve 
(read) and register (write) schemas as needed. If you specify a `KEY_SCHEMA_ID` or `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID`

> explicitly in the `CREATE` statements, ksqlDB will not only retrieve and register the schema 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
explicitly in the `CREATE` statements, ksqlDB retrieves and registers the schema 
```

> specified by the ID from {{ site.sr }} but also serialize data using exactly the same schema referred to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
specified by the ID from {{ site.sr }}, and it also serializes data using the schema referred to
```

by the ID. This can spare you from defining columns and data types manually and also make sure the data 

> are serialized by specified physical schema which can be consumed in downstream systems. Before using 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
are serialized by the specified physical schema, which can be consumed in downstream systems. Before using 
```

schema inference with explicit IDs in ksqlDB, make sure that the {{ site.sr }} is up and running and 
ksqlDB is [configured to use it](../operate-and-deploy/installation/server-config/avro-schema.md).

Here's what you can do with schema inference with ID in ksqlDB:

- Declare streams and tables on {{ site.ak }} topics with supported key and value formats by using 
  `CREATE STREAM` and `CREATE TABLE` statements with `KEY_SCHEMA_ID` or `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID` properties, 
  without needing to declare the key and/or value columns.
- Declare derived views with `CREATE STREAM AS SELECT` and `CREATE TABLE AS SELECT` statements with
  `KEY_SCHEMA_ID` or `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID` properties. The schema of the view is registered in {{ site.sr }} 
  automatically.

> - Serialize output data using schema referred to by `KEY_SCHEMA_ID` or `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID` instead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Serialize output data using the schema referred to by `KEY_SCHEMA_ID` or `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID`, instead
```

!!! important
The schema referred to by `KEY_SCHEMA_ID` and `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID` must be registered in {{ site.sr }}. 
It can be under any subject but must match the format defined by `KEY_FORMAT` and `VALUE_FORMAT` respectively.

!!! important
Key or value columns must NOT be defined in statement if corresponding `KEY_SCHEMA_ID` or `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID`
is supplied.

#### With partial schema inference

The following statement shows how to create a new `pageviews` table by reading
from a {{ site.ak }} topic that has Avro-formatted message values and a
`KAFKA`-formatted `INT` primary key.

```sql
CREATE TABLE pageviews (
    pageId INT PRIMARY KEY
  ) WITH (
    KAFKA_TOPIC='pageviews-avro-topic',
    KEY_FORMAT='KAFKA',
    VALUE_FORMAT='AVRO',
    VALUE_SCHEMA_ID=1
  );
```

In the previous example, only the key column is supplied in the CREATE
statement. ksqlDB infers the value columns automatically from {{ site.sr }} using the provided 
`VALUE_SCHEMA_ID`.

!!! important
The schema referred to by `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID` must be registered in {{ site.sr }}. It can be under 
any subject but must match the format defined by `VALUE_FORMAT`.

### Declaring a derived view with schema ID.

> The following statement shows how to create a materialized view derived from an existing source with `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following statement shows how to create a materialized view derived from an existing source with the `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID`
```

> property. The schema referred to by `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID` will be used to check column compatibility with

Reviewer: ```suggestion
property. The schema referred to by `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID` is used to check column compatibility with
```

output columns and serialize output data. See [Schema Inference and Data Serialization](#Schema-Inference-and-Data-Serialization) 
for more information.

```sql
CREATE STREAM pageviews_new
  WITH (
    VALUE_FORMAT='AVRO',
    VALUE_SCHEMA_ID=1
  ) AS 
  SELECT
    pageId,
    ts
  FROM pageviews
```

!!! important
The schema referred to by `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID` must be registered in {{ site.sr }}. It can be under 

> any subject but must match the format defined by `VALUE_FORMAT`. 

Author: It's called out on line 128. But we can comment here as well

### Schema Inference and Data Serialization

This sections talks about the details in schema inference from schema in {{ site.sr }} to ksqlDB schema
and how output data are serialized when schema ID is used. We refer the schema in {{ site.sr }} as 
physical schema and the schema in ksqlDB as logical schema. Same physical schema instead of logical schema
will be registered under the subject `<topic-name>-key` or `<topic-name>-value` if corresponding
`KEY_SCHEMA_ID` or `VALUE_SCHEMA_ID` is provided.

#### Schema Inference Schema Requirements

> If `WRAP_SINGLE_VALUE` is set to true in the statement, the physical schema is expected to be in `struct`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `WRAP_SINGLE_VALUE` is set to `true` in the statement, the physical schema is expected to be in `struct`
```

> type and the field names will be used as data source column names; field schemas will be inference as

Reviewer: ```suggestion
type and the field names are used as data source column names. Field schemas are inferred as
```

corresponding column data types.

!!! note
`struct` type in `AVRO` should be `record` type; in `PROTOBUF` it should be `message` type and in `JSON_SR`
it should be `object` type.

For example, if physical schema is `AVRO` schema and defined as following in {{ site.sr }} with ID 1:

```
{
"schema":"{
    \"type\":\"record\",
    \"name\":\"PageViewValueSchema\",
    \"namespace\":\"io.confluent.ksql.avro_schemas\",
    \"fields\":[
        {\"name\":\"page_name\",\"type\":\"string\",\"default\":\"abc\"},
        {\"name\":\"ts\",\"type\":\"int\",\"default\":123}
    ]
}"
}
```

!!! note
`AVRO` schema raw string in {{ site.sr }} should be single line raw string without `\n`. Above format

> is for ease of read.

Author: Try to say copy/paste of above avro schema won't work since it contains `\n`. It contains `\n` because it's easier to read.

!!! important
For unsupported types in physical schema, ksqlDB will ignore them and continue translating supported 
types to logical schema. For now, users are expected to verify if the logical schema is expected.

!!! important
During schema translation from physical schema to logical schema, for `struct` type, field names will be
used as column names in logical schema. Note that field names WON'T be uppercased whereas in schema inference
without schema id, the names will be uppercased.

#### Schema Compatibility Check for Derived View

When creating a materialized view, schema IDs can also be used. However, instead of inferring the logical 
schema for the view, it will be used to check compatibility agains current subquery's projection and serialize output
data. For compatibility checks, inferred logical schema must be a superset of subquery projection's
schema which means corresponding column name, type and order should match but inferred logical schema 
can have extra columns.

Consider the following statement:

```sql
CREATE STREAM pageviews_new
  WITH (
    VALUE_FORMAT='AVRO',
    VALUE_SCHEMA_ID=1
  ) AS 
  SELECT
    pageId,
    ts

>   FROM pageviews

Author: Updated below to say what value schema is.

    ]
}"
}
```

!!! note
`AVRO` schema raw string in {{ site.sr }} should be single line raw string without `\n`. Above format
is for ease of read.

and `CREATE` statement is defined as following:

```sql
CREATE STREAM pageviews (
    pageId INT KEY
  ) WITH (
    KAFKA_TOPIC='pageviews-avro-topic',
    KEY_FORMAT='KAFKA',
    VALUE_FORMAT='AVRO',
    VALUE_SCHEMA_ID=1,
    PARTITIONS=1
  );
```

then the schema for `pageviews` will be inferred as:

```
ksql> describe pageviews;

Name                 : PAGEVIEWS
 Field     | Type
------------------------------------
 PAGEID    | INTEGER          (key)
 page_name | VARCHAR(STRING)
 ts        | INTEGER
------------------------------------
```

When you insert values to `pageviews` with `null` value, it will return error:

```
ksql> insert into pageviews values (1, null, null);
Failed to insert values into 'PAGEVIEWS'. Could not serialize value: [ null | null ]. Error serializing message to topic: pageviews-avro-topic1. Invalid value: null used for required field: "page_name", schema type: STRING
```

This is because `page_name` and `ts` are required fields without default values in original physical schema.

!!! important

> ksqlDB doesn't check physical schema referred to by schema ID that its fields are all optional or with 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
ksqlDB doesn't check if the physical schema referred to by a schema ID contains fields that are required without 
```

> a default value to make sure `null` can be serialized for flexibility of physical schema. Users are supposed

Reviewer 2: This is actually an interesting point: does it imply that if a field is required with default value, but the query tries to insert a `NULL`, the `NULL` would be replaced with the default? Or would the whole record be dropped? -- I think the later might actually be better (not sure)? \cc @colinhicks

Reviewer 2: > for flexibility of physical schema.

Not sure what this means?

Author: inserting null for require field will fail actually.

> to make sure `null` can be handled properly either by make physical schema fields optional or with a default

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to make sure `null` can be handled properly either by making physical schema fields optional or with a default
```

> value or by make sure `null` is never inserted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
value or by make sure `null` is never inserted by applying the `IFNULL` function.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe add a link to `IFNULL`?
